motion changes the perception of time we
call a relativity of simultaneity you're
moving I'm not you see events as
simultaneous I see them as happening one
before the other but then when you add
the distance component in it now we see
very different times so there could be a
third person moving in the other
direction see in a different time so how
do you define what now is that leads to
the idea of what is now and your now and
my now are two different now there's no
now there is no now no there is now
there's always now there's an illusion
of now because we're so close together
and we're so small at the speed of light
makes it feel like we have a now but now
doesn't really exist on larger scales
there's no such
[Music]
thing this is Star Talk Neil degrass
Tyson here your personal astrophysicist
I got with me Paul maio Paul what's up
my man good to see you always great to
be back with love you yeah you're
comedian and you got a show on Broadway
or Off Broadway or traveling it was off
Broadway and then Broadway now we're out
on the roadway the road and it's
permission to speak onean show and you
interact with the audience and stuff
yeah yeah we it's about stories from
people from me uh Frank Oz is directing
it Frank created Yoda try being directed
by Yoda he's never wrong well we're
going to do cosmic quaries today yeah I
love these with an oldag old colleague
and friend of mine
H get your last name olash so far
away way to do you resarch here let me
give you a nemonic m think oh you
Shady oh you Shady but instead of you
it's l UI hakee U yes sir there you go
got you you were on my podcast we had a
great conversation awesome book I got
your bio here it's great astrophysic
cosmologist you're previous guest on
Star Talk for three years back and
recently like practically minutes ago
CEO of the AST rical Society of the
Pacific ask you about that in a minute I
didn't know from your sweatshirt that
you were a CEO you're looking good man
man we we're taking the CEO vibe in
another direction right no pretention
yeah we don't need that congrats man
that's awesome appreciate you sir that's
awesome man absolutely thank you so uh
you got a podcast does it fly by
Roddenberry entertainment Jean rry Star
Trek Fame and you've got a a a memoir
out there few years now a Quantum life
it keeps getting released my unlikely
Journey from the street to the Stars
that's the book that we talk about on my
show that's right that reminds me of the
quote from Oscar wild we are all in the
gutter but some of us are looking to the
Stars o that's good you didn't know
about that thought you could have put
that in the book I could have put in the
book that could have been in the book
you could call me next time unless
you're drunk on Thunderbird then you're
not looking up at the stars and you've
also involved with NASA says IMAP
satellite yes so NASA has no shortage of
acronyms so unpack iMap for me the
interstellar mapping and acceleration
probe can't wait to talk to you about it
okay we'll get there in like a minute uh
so the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific I'm a big supporter of theirs
like from way back and they say it
sounds like it's only the Pacific but
they have a mission statement that's
functionally International getting
people to look up yeah and I try to do
that every day right you're succeeding
okay you're succeeding right it's cool
now when I was a kid you know it wasn't
uh so cool to be a nerd right now nerds
are cool science everybody loves space
plus we were
blurs right that's true nerd so there's
no way there a black nerd no there's two
of them trust me at least they don't
know each other yet but they're there oh
I can give you a list is that right oh
do you have a secret meeting before it
was like public that you guys were black
nerds
yeah Society black physicist nerds are a
special subspecies of the whole world
okay cuz cuz people can ask you what
kind of nerd are you they come in
different Elks right so what isn't there
just one General type of nerd science
nerd but like a TV nerd like that kind
of thing yeah well you know the first
question is the difference between a
nerd and a geek right so no here's the
thing I got this i got this so a geek
can be a geek in any specific category
you can be a music geek right okay where
you're just into the music so but you're
not necessarily associated with science
if you're a geek right you're geek
you're just into your thing but a nerd
it say something about your personality
and your behavior and your things you
care quality of your personality I'll
give you some examples I was in the Navy
back in the 80s and a guy asked me yo
how come you're the only brother that
don't wear hella gold and my answer was
it never occurred to
me and he said what does a curd mean
like I couldn't even tell the difference
you know like dudes love cars I could
tell two cars apart like I you know I
yeah what you care it's you care about
different things you care about
different things exactly yeah yeah yeah
so uh do you have a vision for the
Society of the Pacific I do I Absol I I
do so the Pacific has well one just
remind people it's an organization that
promotes public awareness and
understanding of astronomy at all levels
at the amateur level you get a telescope
that's right why turn Pacific that's
what began in San Francisco first
president was the director of Lick
Observatory but it's known as America's
first and oldest National astronomy
organization Lick Observatory is
Observatory of Santa Cruz and so yeah
yeah yeah in the Bay Area there I used
to observe Supernova there back in the
day when I was a postto great place to
drink you know you go with a bottle and
then boom eat chips you got to eat chips
at the observatory so um the ASP one
thing that made it different when it was
founded was this egalitarian perspective
so they accepted professional
astronomers amateur astronomers and
Educators at all the same level because
it was all about sort of just lifting
everybody all together we level it's
like you know yeah the more you include
the better the knowledge highly laudable
fact High laudable fact he doesn't hang
out with
riff don't make me slap you but later
last they added a new group that that is
labeled as enthusiasts good yeah yeah so
here's the thing about it so I
discovered them I join I went to Bay
Area in ' 91 for graduate school and
there was this guy at the nearby
community college of name you're going
to recognize Andy froy yes who was who
was the CE teaching at the community
college excuse me yeah he was teaching
at Foothills Foothills yeah that's right
and so I I'm looking at Mercury magazine
I'm looking at the proceedings thep
produces the magazine for the public
Mercury magazine and they produce
proceedings of scientific
conferences got it in everything
probably one of these books is exactly
from that conference but but you know
what else they do so there are 90
astronomy uh journals in the world pasp
is typically between 15 and 20 of the 90
astronomy journals so they're typically
in the top around 177% of astronomy
journals and there you go a proceedes of
the yeah book this is for every meeting
of the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific every professional meeting they
proceedings yeah and this and it
beautifully published line them up yeah
we all have these and and these are just
two that are here relative to others
that I have on different part of the
Shelf Galaxy Evolution the Milky Way
perspective yeah they made that into a
film starring Tom Cruz he jumps through
a Milky Way uh covered in Vaseline it's
an amazing equations an equation so I
mean there now hundreds of these I mean
it's been around a long time oh
absolutely so very very good to hear
that's right so so I saw them as a
rigorous scientifically rigorous
organization that had the social
consciousness to do this educator train
which nobody else was doing because
Professional Organization they w d to
even talk to the public exactly the ASP
has been everything I care about as a
professional scientist is fulfilled by
that mission why why other societies
picked up on that part of it why have I
mean you know it's it's out there it's a
good example and be inclusive I have an
answer he probably has an answer but I
have an answer in our field yeah there
aren't many fields where it can reach
the enthusiastic amateur and they can
still participate well but your show
does Cosmic queries is a perfect example
what I'm saying that's astronomy and
astral physics you can't really do can
you do that with physics really well you
can't if you're not pompous like you are
no but it's harder because everybody's
looking up you know when we discover
Supernova black hole anything it's
headlines yeah splitting an atom is less
relatable than how many other Sciences
make a headline with that frequency
think about it yeah true and how many
families own their scientific
instruments that they use professionally
like people buy
telescop so that's what I'm saying yeah
so good luck with that sometimes you
need a little bit of that but AB you're
at the helm of very important
organization thank you sir and there it
is so now tell me about the latest NASA
acronym yes Interstellar mapping and
acceleration an acceleration Pro but you
can't have a thing that says IMAP and
then the word mapping is in the middle
of it yeah that that's that's that's bad
it's not working we're going to have to
redo this the word the the word in the
acronym can't be in one of the words of
the acronym it's like G not this Mr
smart alec over here G is not Unix gnu
oh yeah g lenux Unix you guys aren't
that old okay never mind it's the white
hair so here's the thing before this
he's not nerdy enough I was working on a
satellite called the Supernova
acceleration probe and now I'm working
on the interstellar mapping and
acceleration Pro no you're working on
earth related to the
I use the word on yes you did okay so so
this is awesome so why is the word
acceleration in the probe because
essentially what happens is the sun
accelerates particles right and creates
this bubble and the examp the solar wind
the solar wind right it's moving fast it
is supersonic right the heliosphere but
when it hits wa wait wait wait what do
you mean supersonic if it's moving
through the vacuum in space space is it
exactly a vacuum oh it's approximately a
vacuum timately a vacuum yes it is yes
it is okay so cool so it's moving faster
than the speed of sound would be in that
very reduced vacuum exactly and what
happens is is that you know so it's
almost like a boundary where information
only travels one way which is out that's
the heliopause isn't it no the
heliopause is what I'm getting to so
just like the example that's given is
when you when you showing off how much
you let him catch up with you and then
where you find these two
ComEd these guys no more science
done that's the only thing I know bomiz
him first before we put him in you know
when you run water in the faucet and it
makes this and then there's that ring
right that's like the heliopause where
it where it goes from supersonic to
subsonic so our heliopause is doing that
in the interstellar medium but here's
the thing there was a previous satellite
so the guy who's running is Professor
out of Princeton Named Dave mccomus okay
so I don't know if you remember the
ulysis satellite that went over the PO
to the sun didn't it went to the sun
went over the poles of the Sun and we
got to see that the solar wind around
the mid latitudes you have the regular
wind 400 km per second out of the poles
the highp speeed wind 800 kilometers per
second didn't know that so young Dave
mccamus is the guy who made that famous
plot all right okay so then he had an
idea and the idea is crazy let's look at
neutral atoms coming toward Earth from
outer space who looks at neutral atoms
we look at photons we look at different
H nothing more boring than a neutral
atom nothing more boring it's not
ionized
but here's their origin these electrons
from the Sun go out they hit the
heliopause so there's magnetic fields
there there's ions trapped in those
magnetic fields those electrons get
captured by those ions and they become
neutral so it's like it's like neutering
a dog no
so okay well anyway while the ion is
ionized it is tied to the magnetic field
and it's stuck out there but once it
becomes neutral it is no longer stuck
it's no longer tied to the magnet field
because it has no charge because it has
no charge so some of them stream into
the inner solar system so you can get a
map of the stuff that is in the magnetic
field raining back down and they
discovered that if you look at the
galactic magnetic field it wraps around
our bubble and perpendicular to that is
a just like we have a radiation belt
around our planet there is a belt around
our helops and so NASA goes that's
interesting now let's do satellite that
will look at that in way more detail
study the Sun as these things go you
make a tiny Discovery yeah and it can
open up a whole but yeah opens up now
you can build an entire experiment just
for that disc what what do you
anticipate that you might find there do
you have I mean you must have SE and
just the unknown it's the exact same
thing you know you're going to find
something you never seen before just
like they did with IBS right so now
they're looking at acceleration from the
Sun they're looking at acceleration in
those magnetic fields and they're
testing the interstellar medium and what
is made of cuz those particles also
stream in so that's why it's the
interstellar mapping and acceleration
probe so Donald Goldsmith who's a
astronomy writer and co-wrote the
original Cosmos and I I actually
co-authored a book with him on Origins
uh he has a his own uh LLC company and
because he writes books and writes for
TV it's called interstellar
medium no inter media Interstellar media
Interstellar I love that that's great it
was so simple I have an LLC too qukar
okay I thought no one would think of
that turns out there's a lighting
company on the west
coast porkar all right here's a little
bit more heady than theirs though well
this is a cosmic queries yes and we
can't just like shoot this forever
all right do it all right this is James
H English greetings he's from Denmark I
read recently that the universe is
expanding too fast for our theories and
models to fit increasing the Hubble
tension the think the problem is with
our models or is there some Physics we
just haven't discovered to explain this
I.E is the rate not constant due to some
undiscovered property of SpaceTime or is
is there something wrong with the data
so our models are models off do we trust
the data or do we need new physics but
if you if the data is off the model's
off by definition no it's
maybe I spent time in Princeton where
they have a lot of theorists they say
never trust an observation unless it's
backed up by a
theory well that's happened I know of
two cases where observation was made and
it did not fit with the theory I'll give
you a very simple one it was Art
Walker's research when he first got the
images so when you see the pretty images
of the sun with the plasma Loops art did
that first right and so the plasma Loops
had a constant cross-section and so the
the the solar physicist were like dude
there's something wrong with your
telescopes because we know magnetic
fields diverge with altitude so they
should get fatter at the top they're not
getting fatter but just to be clear so
the magnetic field is confining the
plasma right so the shape of the plasma
is the shape of the magnetic field and
so he's saying that the man field is
just a a constant cross-sectional tube
but it should be something more Dynamic
than that at the top they should get
fatter right just like if you look
Theory said that right and art was like
ain't nothing wrong with my telescopes
so what I'm going to do is I'm gonna
have the same pass bam I'm going to give
you three different configuration
telescopes I'm going give you a Crain a
Hellion and a Richie crean so you can't
say it's the Optics and not only that so
we would fly 16 to 22 telescopes with
all these pass bands which ended up
being a subset of them the same pass
bands on sdo and EIT the solar
satellites and show no this is what
nature is doing it's not an issue with
the pass bands it's not an issue with
the the Optics this is what nature is
doing and now that's what everyone knows
the theory had to be adjusted the theory
had to be adjusted right right you had
come up with a mechanis that can it can
happen so let's get back to Hubble hble
tension right so people have of Articles
there's been a lot of Articles right and
so essentially and everybody wants to
just throw out the big bang that throw
out Dark Energy click bait clickbait
yeah right exactly it's clickbait right
so essentially what's been happening is
you have the cosmic microwave background
radiation which has been a treasure
Trove of cosmological information then
you have the standard way that we
measure expansion I have some object I
know uh how fast it's moving how fast
it's moving away it's shift and I also
know distance based on its brightness
right and so now I can make a Hubble
diagram I fit the plunk data I get a
value of the Hubble constant they don't
agree but the plunk is the cosmic
background PL satellite from Europe say
stuff don't you know I'll be leaving
stuff out man that's why that's why I'm
here that's why you're here thank you
thank you yeah so to keep you continuous
so now there's new James webspace
telescope wait wait just set the stage
so you have data from the early Universe
you get a Hubble rate you get the
traditional galaxies usually with
Supernova or some other standard candle
and those two numbers do not match they
do not match in my day measurements of
the expansion rate of the universe
differed by a factor of two a factor of
two yeah yeah and so now they differ by
just a few percent right but the aab
bars the error bars the uncertainty is
way smaller than the difference in those
two measurements right so that is a more
severe fact than not knowing the expans
rate of the universe by a factor of two
so we had a similar problem with the
ages of stars and the age of the
universe which depends on the Hubble
thing right and so it was the
cosmological data that had to be
somebody found stars that were older
than the universe right stars in the
Halo look like they were older than the
age of the universe right but then and
the headlines were oh catastrophe oh my
God yeah yeah people like ready to give
up on
but then we realize oh no our cosmology
needs to be improved and so you know
what happened in the 90s really you know
post Kobe that changed everything in in
cosmology right and then not Kobe Bryant
not Kobe BR the Kobe satellite you mean
right that game we got 80 he scored 81
points that game no not that game didn't
change cosmic background Explorer one of
the first High Precision measurements of
the cosmic backgroundin Smoot mhm no NOS
yeah yeah so circling to the tension so
tell me so what what's something's got
to give yeah something's got to give so
I think that there's something that we
don't understand I think I think I'm
trusting the measurements and I think
that I trust the the measurements look
good don't they the measurements look
good I was I was involved in Supernova
cosmology right and also weak lensing
studies for looking at structure of
growth and these sort of things and so
all this different data there's there's
more than one probe right people are
using different types of stars right
that's where you get the confidence from
it's not just one one data point from
one telescope James asks is is there
some Physics we just haven't yet
discovered we missing physics or is we
or we just have to adjust the model well
what there people coming up with these
models that maybe the expansion rate of
the universe we have it like okay
there's this initial impulse right and
then the universe evolves based on the
energy densities of the constituents of
which there are three main ones right
radiation which is stuff that moves very
fast through fa space but almost not at
all through time matter which moves very
fast through time and almost not at all
through space and SpaceTime which has
its own energy density that we call dark
energy which doesn't move through either
one right and so initially radiation
dominates then matter comes to dominate
then Dark Energy I.E SpaceTime energy
density comes to dominate we think un
well that's what that's what you think
right in each one you can look at what
the expansion rate would be of the
universe but here's the thing once we
discovered the higs particle we first
time we discovered what is known as a
scalar Quantum field what do I mean by
that right so we'll ask you that what do
you mean by
don't ask yourself these questions
that's for us to do so one of one of the
things that we look at squ what a squ
and I don't need to be here let's go ask
myself questions and anwers who needs
the I'll query myself yeah you you read
them let's just back up in the United
States we surely would have discovered
the higs ban oh yeah uh with our super
conducting super collider whose budget
was cancelled right around when peace
broke out in Europe uh right between 89
procurement yeah so the center mass of
particle physics moved to Europe to CERN
to the large hydron collider they
discovered the higs B on so now what
happened so here's what here's the deal
here's why I bring this up because what
is known as a scalar field so when you
think about the fields that you know of
right they're like oh the electric field
I have a charge it has electric field
magnetic field I have a charge that's
moving it generates magnetic field
gravitational field oh there's this
matter so every field you know of
there's some Source in matter but then
here come the particle physics they're
like oh yeah you know why every electron
is identical they don't say it this way
this is mine no every electron is
identical same reason every C note
musical note is identical because
they're not the real thing the real
thing is the string or the air that's
vibrating right so they're they invoke
this idea of quantum Fields so the
quantum field just permeates all of
SpaceTime and it's just there but
nothing is real in that Quantum field
inations of the field are our particles
right so there are the permanent ones
and there are the virtual ones right so
we measure the excitations as particles
as particles right now here's what
happens though they say oh there's this
thing called a hicki it's just there
it's just everywhere in space at all
times just there right scaler field no
source and I'm like in my mind as a
young sciencetist I'm like Is that real
then they discover they ring that damn
field and create the particle I'm like
wow so now what can you do oh inflation
looks like Allan Goose creates inflation
looks like Universe rapidly expanded oh
I know what I'll do I'll create another
scaler field I call it the inflaton
field so now you see some dynamic
happening you can just create a new
field so but it sounds like you're
pulling stuff out of your ass it does it
does but you're supposed to like use it
to make predictions so you know to test
whether what came out of your is it jump
that's
right sh is testable I actually have a
device that does that I'll bring it to
the next show oh you remember the
list from the 90s no oh it was like a
joke and it it it it it lived on the
internet the early internet and it was
like all these different types of
one of them was bu you felt it came
out you wiped there's nothing on the
toilet paper there's nothing in the
toilet but you know what happened oh wow
okay
okay so some people are doing that
they're saying maybe the universe's
expansion rate hasn't just been what we
think it of as simple as we think it is
and it could and then another question
be yet another phenomenon acting on the
expansion rate beyond the three that we
character do we do we have an idea what
it might be weird Quantum come up with
something yeah you come up with
something is weird the SCI ific term
you're going with here sure so but let
me clarify here so this notion that the
expansion rate is misbehaving let me
characterize it that way that just means
it doesn't match what our three most
potent models would give us for it right
okay so do we introduce a fourth
accounting yeah or do we say that one of
these are wrong right they all working
in harmony or each of those have to be
adjusted well there's an assumption
within there as well that comes from the
cosmological principle that the universe
is isotropic homogeneous and now people
are looking if I look in that direction
I look in that direction I look in that
direction is the expansion rate the same
versus distance in every particular
direction so you know that's why we have
big surveys coming on like uh the ver
Ruben telescope lsst because we
typically have pencil beam surveys for
the most part or surveys that don't go
to LST was the large synoptic survey
telescope but we're astronomers and we
don't like going that way we don't play
that so we just named it after one of
one you guys just like acronyms you're
just the you're the laziest telescope
yeah she discovered dark matter in the
Milky Way wow and speaking of you know
another telescope that's on coming is
the Nancy Grace Roman n Grace Roman
telescope let's looking for dark matter
or dark energy or both both both it's
going to be a survey telescope everybody
knows that Neil yeah so Nancy Grace
Roman going back to the ASP she valued
ASP so much that when she passed away
recently she left the organization a few
million dollars w oh yeah yeah okay well
listen astronomers have millions of
dollars NY Grace Roman had millions of
dollars we're going to jump to the next
that was a great question James we're
going to jump to the next one um Adam
Oman hi Dr Tyson and Dr ol Adam from
Poland here first all of first of all I
am a big fan of everything Dr Tyson
Tyson is involved in I love his books
all his programs he's been on my
question is about the ability to detect
various partic in the atmospheres at a
very distant planets we know that uh
that the light is altered as it travels
towards us but how exactly does this
happen
ooh absorption Spectrum yeah yeah yeah
so it happens what's absorbing what so
what happens is is that when you look at
a uh Transit of an exoplanet so that
means that it'll go in front of its Star
right and so at that time the light from
the star will pass through the
atmosphere of the planet through the
edges of the planet yeah all right so
we're with you you have this Transit and
the planet is moving across the surface
of now you don't see that you don't see
it you just see light yeah okay so I'm
getting light in my telescope so as that
planet is going in front of a star if it
has an atmosphere the light from the
star passes through the planet's
atmosphere and that light interacts with
that atmosphere around the Ed right yeah
that light interacts and so certain
wavelength of light aren't going to make
it out the other side they're going to
be absorbed M right chemistry The
Atmosphere by the chemistry of the
atmosphere but remember the star has its
own Spectrum as well so you get a
spectrum of the Star by itself get a
spectrum when the light is passing
through the planet's atmosphere and you
subtract them and what's left over is a
spectrum of the planet ah and now you
can say oh I see this element or a
molecule in that particular atmosphere
and is that is that a constant in other
words that is a proven theory that works
every time well it's hard to do and so
James web Space Telescope was built to
do that job and it actually has
succeeded in doing that job those were
some of the early release like look hey
we can do it it hasn't just succeeded
it's badass badass it's opened up the
whole industry to the whole cottage
industry to make that happen yeah yeah
all right all right we're going to go on
to Jordan Vina from North Dakota I've
been curious about Dark Matter so he
went from Denmark Denmark Poland Poland
North Dakota
Dakota places I've never been to
okay it may not ever go all right I've
been curious about dark matter is it
possible that the reason why we don't
understand dark matter is because it
defies our understanding of the laws of
physics meaning is it possible that dark
matter is something that we can that can
travel faster than light o or how
massive gravitational effect without
having large mass love the show let me
let me shape that another way and throw
it right in your lap so we probe the
universe you using our methods and tools
of science that we have developed to
this day could Dark Matter simply be
awaiting some brilliant theoretical
understanding coupled with some
brilliant new kind of telescope that
would see it in ways that no one had
previously dreamt so is it awaiting
technology is it awaiting new physics I
think it's more basic I or is it is it
going to is it going to plug in with
just a new kind of particle that just
doesn't interact off trivia my very
first physics research that's what I was
wondering you were in that was summer of
91 on the cold dark M cdms right in in
in the basement in Berkeley building a
dark matter direct detection right which
we've not detected any Dark Matter your
PhD is from no no no it's it's a funny
thing I I got accepted I applied to
Berkeley and Stanford I got rejected
from Berkeley accepted by Stanford when
idot got rejected Berkeley I know but
here off to stanf I would work the
idiots go
but no here's what happened I worked at
Berkeley the summer between undergrad
and grad on that project at the end of
the summer they said dude if you want to
come to Berkeley come but I didn't know
Stanford was this High flute in school I
didn't know that wait you didn't know
that dude I was from the country man
inter smart guy his his his Memoir is
called from the street
star what part of that title do you not
understand all right you thought it was
a town in Connecticut not a university I
didn't know Connecticut existed so and I
still haven't seen it but anyway and the
town connected has an M I think does
just going along with think about this
dark Mattery stuff right nothing at the
scale of galaxies and larger or
basically over two 20,000 light years
bigger than the G Galactic arm nothing
moves consistent with the laws of
physics and so there's two ways right
there's this like alternative gravity
theories which you know just like when
you think they're dead they come back
and they're stronger than ever and then
there is this oh there's other stuff
Dark Matter oh we got some great ideas
for what that is it's black holes it's
machos it's super symmetric particles
oops machos would be massive compact
Halo objects so we come up with our
better instruments are two kinds of yes
they don't exist we we look for them
they're not there the super symmetric
particles certainly should have saw them
they're not there what point no serious
do you go let's stop looking like and
move on to something else it's like
looking to say like looking for a second
sock and you just don't find it no no
because when we have to admit that we're
stupid or that we're exactly but but we
d by the uncertainty there are ambulance
chasing theorists out there the
slightest observation that's a little
quirky they're going to come up with a
whole Theory to understand maybe several
yeah right CU only have to get it right
once is that what they call them I call
them that so the the answer is that sort
of there we we're never going to stop
trying to pursue this Theory and you
know something is a mess the question is
what is it but is it possible that dark
matter is something that could travel
faster than light what is your theory on
that well we
have is there
is that what it is if dark matter is
some kind of matter we call it matter
but we don't know what it is well no
here's the thing why we know it's not
that because there two models it's not
moving faster than light because the two
models that were competing were is it
hot dark matter or is it cold Dark
Matter so particles moving very fast
would be hot dark matter and we know
that the best model is Lambda cium cold
Dark Matter dark matter just feels every
time I read about it it just feels like
I don't know there like a guy shows up
at a party or something and he just it's
there but it makes it's a weird it makes
it makes the only thing axons and I
don't find that to be well uh people
making a particles that'll do this yeah
yeah well they made of a particle to to
cancel out the electric dipole moment of
the proton which should exist right if
if the quarks have electric charges and
there's separation between the minus and
the negative there should be some what's
called separation between them which we
call a dipole moment but one is not
measured so Helen Quinn at Al they came
up with this idea maybe there's this
other field that cancels it it's the
Wild West it's the wild west which
actually makes it exting you come up
with all these ideas and you go through
all them but because we know that
whatever the dark matter is it's cold
and not warm yeah it can't be going
faster than light exactly because it
would have evidence it give evidence
gravitationally right and then you know
you'd see I imagine shrink off radiation
right that's when you travel faster than
uh light in some medium yeah you you
emit light
mhm so dark matter wouldn't be dark baby
here we go next one D from upstate New
York I recently watched a side Channel
show with Hakeem what and I fell asleep
it was really boring that was weird why
would you write that David I'm the guy
who wakes everyone up no you're the best
man you're the best I recently watch s
Chan with AEM it was about gravitational
waves just wondering can they also alter
time if a huge Collision occurred near
our solar system how would we feel them
would we be alive to physically notice
so so will it do damage first of all
yeah and we know it's a disturbance in
the gravitational field and everybody
knows after the movie Interstellar right
that if you're in a different
gravitational field you're going to age
differently so what what what kind of
consequences that's a good question like
like the perations of time travel uh
this is a good time to bring up the
Andromeda Paradox okay that's you know I
was thinking the same thing I was
not what what is the Andromeda Paradox
well the Andromeda Paradox is the fact
that if you and I are looking at
Andromeda Andromeda the Galaxy the
Galaxy not the stars constellation yeah
not the constellation and not the strain
that killed millions of people two not
they drive a strin right two and a half
million light years away then what
happens is suppose you're sitting in
your chair and I'm running by and at the
second I run by you we both look up at
Andromeda because I'm moving in your
stationary we're going to see events
that are days apart even though we're in
the same location looking at the same
time and you think that relativity and
you think that
say relativity and keep talking how wait
in this scenario how far away from me
are you when you're running by the same
place we're in the same place
essentially so you're like literally
I've never heard of this Paradox it's a
little no Paradox and the thing that you
see and I see are days apart days apart
because of our physical perspective on
well here's what you would think you
would think the light is arriving right
now we should all be receiving this
light but that's not how it works motion
changes the perception of time and so we
know about that in terms of the local
Universe we call the relativity of
simultaneity right you're moving I'm not
you see events as simultaneous I see
them as happening one before the other
right but then when you add the distance
component in it now we see very
different times so there could be a
third person moving in the other
direction seeing a different time so how
do you define what now is so we you're
in the same even though you're in the
same place yeah while we're sitting here
I'm here you're running by we look up at
the drama at the same time and we're
seeing something from the same location
we're seeing things days apart days
apart and that leads to the idea of what
is now and your now and my now are two
different now there no now there is no
now no there is now there's always now
there's an illusion of now because we're
so close together and we're so small the
speed of light makes it feel like we
have a now right but now doesn't really
exist on larger scales there's no such
thing but but there is always has to be
a now in all seriousness no no that is
your bias that is your bias that's so
that's so Galilean but that's so
backwards right
I've never I've never gotten heckled
from the left and the right at the same
time that's right all right so wait so
so what is the upshot of this but what
was the question again cuz they talking
about time right they're talking about
now or something and I'm just like that
now it was about gravitational waves
wondering can they also alter time if a
huge Collision occurred in our near our
solar system how would we feel them
would we be alive to physically notice
right you curve space and you stretch
time right it's kind of the idea like
what a black hole does right you curve
space you know time moves more slowly
relatively but these phenomena of
gravitational waves are incredibly
subtle and so the real calculation to do
is what type of gravitational wave would
be necessary it's like the big order for
that to happen for that to happen to be
to to be felt to be felt right or to be
yeah because the one that the first one
that was measured it jiggled the
experiment by 12 12th the diameter of a
proton there you go you ain't feeling
that you ain't feeling that but we know
they gravitational waves yeah we measure
them right so you know you you you want
to think of what event what what
magnitude of wave do you need intensity
and then calculate what sort of event
that event would surely kill you before
you had any experience of the W but
there are a whole host it's an infinite
number of things that could cause a
gravitational wave right mean wait wait
the gravitational wave moves to speed so
it can't kill you before the wave hits
you that would all happen at the same
time oh that's a good thing if you add
those things oh well that's the upside
no you don't even know you don't even
know so you get compressed to
nothingness you get ripped apart this is
like a Sci-Fi thing right the
gravitational wave
anator exactly all right we're going to
move on can we do a lightning round
Absolut we got some great ones here we
go all lightting around dude you know
what that means be even more loquacious
yes exactly right right yeah okay here
we go I've always been bothered by
physicist preoccupation with
conservation of information especially
in regard to particles falling into a
black hole firstly it sounds more like a
philosophical position than one derived
from through matics or scientific method
correct me secondly Mr Heisenberg taught
us that one can never know all
information about a particle thus can't
we consider that information to never
have existed in the first place and thus
can't be destroyed I I I have one thing
for Allan Allan if you're going to ask a
question on acid you got to send the
tablets to us too so we can be on the
same wavelength and answer the question
tablets go Tabs go t he's not a Allan g
go ahead answer answer that question he
actually remembers the 60s
exactly if you live to the 60s you
shouldn't remember all right yeah I like
that I say here here I say here here I
on the information this is a cultural
phenomenon nerds ain't cool and so they
try to make something cool that ain't
cool all right so this whole thing about
oh you know Quant black holes have hair
we made a bet man nerd shut the hell up
nobody care damn I don't care so here's
what here's what I think they're saying
right if I look at the sun I can take a
spectrum of the sun just to clarify he
said black holes have no hair yes what
he meant
was that when matter becomes a black
hole it should have only like three yeah
physical parameters like angle momentum
Mass charge charge so the idea was
whatever it looked like before it has
none of that later once it becomes a
black hole so it says it has no hair but
that's back when enough people had hair
that that was important part of how you
identify but now that bald look you know
the billionaire yeah exactly hey
speaking of which you know something I
realized so you know I grew up in
segregated Mississippi so I go to
graduate school and I would play
basketball all the time and I noticed
that you sucked at it oh man I was a I
didn't suck until I joined the Cambridge
Athletic Club League at the age of 49
then I suck okay in the '90s I was great
but here's the thing I noticed something
and that is if there was a white dude
who wasn't present and you're trying to
describe him to someone they invoke his
hair color Yes we didn't do that that
was it's not our vocabulary I don't know
you mean they say like you know Paul M
the guy with the dark hair yeah exactly
yeah it's like in China you don't you
don't imagine people are iding each
other invoking hair color it's the
person black straight hair
but where I'm from we we invoke skin
color oh the lightskinn dude the red
bone the yellow bone the see I do with
voice like you know Neil Tyson he talks
like James ear jones I do it like that
you do basically this is
CNN so we're going to move on so no so
but the point is that yeah some nerd
thing that no but let me tell you what
unlike a black hole take the sun right
you can reconstruct what made the sun
that's how we know oh the sun looks like
three dozen Supernova constituted you
can look at what is made of today and
reconstruct where it must have come from
you can't do that with a black hole
right that's the I so you're in the we
lost information camp in the black hole
or clearly or or information there's too
much made of this information idea both
exactly okay this is where he's coming
from yeah okay give me another one so
here we go my name is Ross I live in
Madison Wisconsin could Dark Energy
whatever it is be the mechanism behind
the big squeeze as an analogy consider a
magnetic field that comes out of one
pole folds back on itself goes into the
other pole Imagine This magnetic field
being the fabric of space time dark
energy no the point is the dark energy
is making us expand and never return
maybe meant dark dark matter okay so is
there sufficient Dark Matter to close us
back and then have the big squeeze oh no
not even close not even close Okay up on
that one lightning answer right right
okay next okay when were we this is
Christopher from St Louis when were we
looking into the cosmos for possible
Dyson spheres what criteria are we using
to tell the difference between a Dyson
Sphere and something else get that Dyson
Sphere out of your mind right now all
right all right cuz I did a little
calculation M right and so did I go
ahead okay oh by the way just make it
clear there are people who when when
they want to know stuff they look it up
on the internet but when you're a
scientist you calculate the answer okay
right I gave someone an answer one time
oh where did what source did you use my
in my education it's the brain app try
okay try it some sometimes it's called
book learning so basically you're not
going to have enough matter to build a
Dyson Sphere if you took all of Jupiter
and you tried to make a Dyson Sphere
around the Sun using all of it the idea
is that that matter that's like taking a
human eyeball and trying to make a
sphere around a basketball using that
material so you're trying to harness the
energy of a
star you're trying to absorb it in
matter right and then convert it to
useful energy right and so you do not
have enough matter in the solar system
to create something to create something
that you can put around because it's not
large enough or because it can't hold
because it's not large it's not it's
like the stars are so much bigger than
their planets have you seen the garbage
bags at Costco cells you put one of
those around the star come on guys get
so let let me add to what you just said
cuz it's a brilliant Revelation
regarding the material necessary right
if you had that much material it means
you're visiting other star systems why
would this is not even an interesting
excise you don't even need it at that
what are you
trying you scooping up thousand the
planets of a thousand solar to get the
energy from one star what the hell you
doing hey guys we already got the energy
why are we trying to create the energy
you know what the sun already has a
Dyson Sphere you know what it's called
so when you think of the sun you think
or a star you think of as two parts the
core and the envelope right the envelope
is a damn dios sphere it's already
there 50% of the matter right 50% of the
matter is in the core 50% is in the
envelope and it's absorbing the energy
that's coming out and radiating into a
useful form that we could build our
solar arrays and capture all let me add
to that last year there was a research
paper on a observing project to look for
Dyson spheres wow now you know how
they're going to do this they're looking
for very very red star systems oh so
they're like they're not getting all the
energy they they're just saying that if
you absorb all the energy from a star at
this greater radius yeah then it would
then
yeah in infrared in the infrared and so
they're suggesting that they're aliens
so they have a data set of because
there's all these stars that are in
shrouded in dust that do the exact same
that's exactly the the rebuttal to that
that there stars when you're in dust
they absorbs the energy and it reated
radiator it makes a star look very red
so that was the ordinary explanation for
those very red stars in that experiment
we got to wrap okay can I say one more
thing no okay Astro Society
oh Astros Asos society.org come join us
the Society of the Pacific yes as and
and it may very well soon be the
astronomical societ and you could be a
nerd you could be a geek you could be an
Enthusiast you could be a educator you
could be a learner all of that yeah and
and you know you can give more than you
want but we have a very low donation we
ask to become a member of our community
here we go it's about money no it's not
man but you can give more so here you go
under your leadership yeah will it
become the Astronomical Society of the
planet I think think so and the other
thing is let me tell you my other thing
have my my big thing is going to be I'm
going to take humanity and when I look
at the history of uh mathematics so
here's the thing right the big
bottleneck for people getting into stem
is math right when people go to college
ask themselves three questions when they
choose their major what do I like how
much math is it how much money can I
make doing it and what has the least
amount of math right and so what needs
to happen is so when I look at the I I I
I look at it historically and I look at
it in four phases there's the early
phase let's forget that here's how I
name them the Library of Alexandria
that's when you have you know ukl you
got the Pythagorean theorem all that
exists you got basic geometry then you
go to Nanda or the city of learning this
is Arata Brahma Gupta the Gupta dynasty
right where they come up with the place
value system the numerals that become
Arabic numerals zero they're really
Hindu numerals that's they Hindu numeral
and the zero comes out of there exactly
right and then the third step is the
house of wisdom right this is where you
get quadis solving equations the stuff
we do in stem every day and then you go
to Cambridge all right so I right
now Newton right now Cambridge England
the average human on earth if you stop
them and ask them any math question they
are they got the first two steps covered
we need to raise Humanity arithmetic and
a little bit of algebra exactly
trigonometry but if you here's what I
mean if you go up to average person you
say hey what's two dogs plus three dogs
they'll say five dogs what's two
galaxies plus three galaxies five
galaxies what's 2x s y Cub Z Plus 3x y
Cub Z get out of my face nerd it's the
same problem but they don't realize it
cuz we have it Lear say get out my first
I whip out my Texas instrument bang bang
bang Texas instument holy cow yeah he
keeps it right next to his palm pil
there you go so anyway I want to raise a
little Humanity HP join us HP 45 in
there I got a kidra and a star what is
that thing Sund
there you go wait I got a stone
circle stone hinge you got a stone hinge
in your backyard got a nap to
plyer all right we out we out here yeah
peace yeah yeah hakee really good to see
you again thanks your first time in my
office here at the planetarium first
time I've touched you in 20 years that
don't sounds a little creepy you're
welcome so this has been Star Talk
Cosmic queries Edition Poe with my old
timey friend colleague hake welcome back
and of course Paul great to be here all
right till next time I bid you to keep
looking up
[Music]